an original thought came to me while I
was sending an email to my lawyer all
right I might as well just tell you what
the email of my lawyer was right off the
bat you know I noticed went over my
divorce documents that the judge very
casually insults me in passing makes a
judgment on me psychologically in
passing in these documents and I vaguely
alluded to this you're on YouTube before
and I wondered if it was based on at
that time looking up YouTube videos
about me where does this where has this
come from but it says just in passing so
casually that yet well you know yeah
this guy you know he kind of may have
some some problems he seems to lack
empathy he may lack the capacity for
empathy I have no idea I I was not able
to attend court I was not able to be
there in person I was not able to talk
to the judge I have no idea what
ridiculous arguments or evidence my
ex-wife's lawyer presented to the court
I have no idea
but what I just wrote to my own lawyer
now was look if somebody says in court
if somebody says to the judge that I'm
Dyslexic there has to be an empirical
test where I can go and get tested and
then say to the court no I'm not
dyslexic and I can prove it here's the
proof okay so the judge has to retract
this statement or you can't you can't
judge me on the basis of the assumption
that i'm dyslexic if somebody says that
i'm diabetic in court there must be some
tests i can get i go to a hospital go to
a doctor go to a specialist they can put
me through some series of trials and
then give this official verdict to the
court no this person is not diabetic how
is it that in all of Western culture and
Western civilization we've just become
resigned to this idea that there are all
of these really deeply judgmental
psychoanalytic terms circulating
whether the term specifically come from
the dsm-5 you know whether they come
from bio psychiatry psychoanalysis
various other schools of psychology
doesn't really matter if the purpose of
this video treating them all in one
category the influence of pop psychology
on pop culture when I ask this question
to my lawyer what occurs to me is this
looking back at you know my lifetime now
40 years old and about the last 200
years in terms of what I did in
religious studies within the last 200
years there's really only been one new
idea in new religious movements new
religious movements this is the polite
academic phrase used for cults cult
studies this kind of thing when you look
at what happened in fringe religious
groups in the last 200 years the
hocus-pocus hasn't changed since the
Dark Ages there's a lot of magic there's
a lot of manipulation things like cold
reading techniques and some of those
things haven't changed in 2,000 years
some of them we have on the record going
back to ancient India or ancient Greece
and Rome you know to give you an example
people sit in a waiting room waiting to
see the great guru the great master
talking about their problems and maybe
this waiting room the walls appear to be
marble and there are statues purely
solid stone hallway but in fact there's
a little cubby hole where someone can
listen in to their conversation while
they're waiting to see the Guru and then
when they go in to see the Guru
miraculously the Guru seems to be able
to read their minds or he interprets
some signs importance and he seems to
know exactly what the problems are seems
know exactly what worries that of their
mind and the magic was you had someone
listening in to their conversation
before they they came in for the
interview a lot of those things have
been documented going back centuries and
centuries and those didn't change the
one thing that was really new in
religion in the last 200 years was
exactly
psychoanalysis psychology psychiatry
this shared vocabulary and approach to
problem solving popular psychology right
what I've seen in the transition to the
social media era is that the type of
bullying interrogation and
cross-examination that used to go on
only inside psychoanalytic cults I
really just mean any kind of cult
influenced by pop psychology psychiatry
or you name it there are many many
examples of this but obviously
Scientology is one on a pretty large
scale Scientology was really built
around a psychoanalytic form of
confession the person sits there and
holds the magic eReader holds these
electronic you know measurement devices
and then confesses his or her sins and
what they've been thinking about and
talks about their repressed feelings
towards their brother and their parents
these kinds of things again you can
actually see YouTube video showing this
this is an adaptation of some of the
methods and again jargon from psychology
and psychiatry and then it's put into a
powerfully charged faith-based
hierarchical situation where of course
the leaders of these cults these new
religious movements they want your faith
they want your devotion they want your
adherence that want your time and they
want your money in the end it's about
getting people to believe enough to
donate money so you can act out the
whole pantomime again and groups like
Scientology manage to collect quite a
lot of money through these types of
these types of dialogues so the one
thing that's really been new in the last
200 years in religion and again
Scientology is not the only example
certainly within Buddhism within various
forms of Asian religion you got to see
the appropriation and ad
tation of concept summons directly from
Sigmund Freud looks and some for a
specific source of that senators from
pop psychology in general and of course
you'd get the repackaging of some
elements of traditional Buddhism but you
also just get complete innovation and
direct imitation I would also say the
creation of transcendental meditation as
a product marketed to white Americans
this is another another examples there
are many what I see now in the era of
social media is that this same style of
interrogation cross-examination and
judgment is not happening in a
confessional booth is not happening in
the privacy of a cult leader talking to
a cult member or that this kind of this
kind of hierarchical arrangement that so
many new New Berlin troops had it's
become a popular sport on the Internet
where I mean they're the most vocal
minority here on the internet it's not
everybody it's not a huge part of our
population but it's a minority of our
culture that casts a really long shadow
and you see people on anonymous message
boards like reddit who just spent hours
and hours of their day reading about
other people's psychological problems or
their complaints about their lives and
casting judgment and casting aspersions
this may sometimes be in the in the form
of giving advice people who come here on
YouTube and through YouTube comments or
responses on Facebook even which is less
anonymous and I mean in a strange sense
I feel like this trickles up to a judge
in a court of law who feels no shame in
just casually and him passing suggesting
I mean not only with no diagnosis with
no no evidence no one of this nothing
was considered without talking to me
once though meeting me without any
statement from any psychiatrist wrote it
really with no relevant evidence of any
kind again unless this judge
check out my youtube channel or
something and didn't want to admit what
what her sources were that a judge would
so casually cast this type of damning
aspersion on someone to say that they
feel no empathy and and then for there
to be no way for that to be falsified
these mysterious you know mental
conditions that people take such delight
in accusing one another of having being
a narcissist being a sociopath having no
empathy you know if it can't be
falsified if there's no way I can clear
my name in the same sense that I can
clear my name of the allegation that I
have diabetes that I can clear my name
of the allegation that I have dyslexia
because I can go and get a test that
proves either I'm dyslexic or I'm not or
I'm a little bit dyslexic or I'm a lot
dyslexic if there is no test if there
are no verifiable criteria how is this
different from Catholics in a small
village in the dark ages weighing up one
another's souls how is this different in
principle I really mean this from what
went on in the Salem witch trials when
people would interpret a sign such as
the fact that a young woman was alone in
a barn when a single large black fly was
lazily dancing in the sunlight well they
would try to interpret this as
indicating you know the evils in her
soul the witchcraft it's a real example
if you read testimony from Salem witch
trials
they're often interpreting very symbolic
and very peculiar things I read an
account of a murder in a in a small town
in northern Laos where I was doing
research was interested in history and
culture where it came down to an
interpretation of someone's dream
someone had a dream that someone else
was was a which basically was somehow
connected to black magic demons dark
forces or something um
my problem here ultimately is not with
the ontological claim that narcissism is
real or that empathy exists as something
that can be scientifically tested and
proven to have a certain absence it's
not really what I'm questioning what I'm
questioning is the mentality of an
audience and an audience that I see on
social media all around the world an
audience that has been trained to
delight in really playing the role of
the Spanish Inquisition but unlike the
Spanish Inquisition from what I see it
really seems like the Inquisition never
ends the goal posts keep moving if
people can't prove that I'm a narcissist
or if they can't prove that I lack
empathy then they're gonna try to prove
that I don't speak Chinese well tough
they're gonna try to prove that I was
lying about the job I had in in China
you know this this is an inquisition and
I don't feel I'm especially marked out
for that I really don't I don't think
I've received the worst of it I don't I
think there were a lot of people who are
who are the targets of this to a much
greater extent for whatever reason
they're more appealing targets so
they're more porous or what-have-you
[Music]
most people want to re-examine the
legacy of the last 200 years in the
development of bio psychiatry obviously
in terms of the negative impacts on the
patient's you know people who are now
living with brain damage due to
electroshock therapy
due to bio psychiatric drug treatments
neuroleptics antipsychotics
antidepressants drugs that are now
absolutely proven to cause brain damage
to very serious negative side effects
through your life and the benefits are
not proven or in some cases have been
proven to be nil which is to say no
better than placebo
okay that's one impact of the last 200
years of that cultural and pseudo
scientific development and of course
I've already mentioned there's this kind
of focused specific peculiar influence
that popular psychology had on the
development of groups like Scientology
new religious movements and cults what
I'm most afraid of is the impact on the
other 90% of us who don't fall into
either one of those categories because
it seems to me that that has become the
stretching rack that has become the
inquisitors tool that people have come
to regard as their Sunday night
entertainment to be applied to anyone
they can get their hands on and with
certainly no purpose in mind of in any
way helping the person on the other end
who is thus in a sense being analyzed